oh no you can you can definitely smell
it Joe I generally feel like I'm gonna
vomit death
that's disgusting no no no no right
South Africa can be one of the harshest
environments on the planet with
temperatures soaring during the day and
sometimes plummeting at night but the
animals that live here have evolved to
withstand these elements and over
millions of years come up with some
weird and wonderful ways in which to
survive in the savannas
the savanna is the largest biome in
South Africa covering over one-third of
the entire country it is a mixture of
shrubs and trees but is dominated by
grassland
and it's these long grasses that are the
hunting grounds for one of South
Africa's most peculiar creatures
the secretary bird endemic to
sub-saharan Africa and unmistakable in
appearance these large birds are in fact
related to Raptors but unlike other
species in the family secretary birds
spend most of their time on the ground
walking around in search of prey nesting
pairs will make for life and will be
seen stalking together when raising
chicks when hunting they use their
exceptionally long legs to strike their
prey delivering a fatal blow with a
single kick their kicks are indeed that
powerful they are the equivalent to five
times its own body weight and the strike
is delivered in 15 milliseconds that's
1/10 of a blink of an eye making the
secretary bird one of the most
remarkable creatures that lives on the
savannas but here in South Africa even
familiar animals have unusual features
now the leopard tortoise is the only
member of the tortoise family that
doesn't have a scoot on the top of its
neck scoots are the keratin plates which
make up ER tortoises shell tortoise
species around the world are terrestrial
and will only head to water to drink but
due to the lack of this upper scoot the
leopard tortoise has the ability to
raise its head I will often be seen
taking a dip during the heat of the day
South Africa is known for its megafauna
but as night begins to fall a host of
other species come to life
including those that live on the forest
floor the African giant millipede is the
largest millipede species in the world
they can grow up to around 12 inches
long and live between five to seven
years in the wild and they have around
three to four hundred legs with four per
body segment and they don't breathe
through lungs like you and I instead
they have these tiny pore like
structures located along the length of
their body known as sphericals which
they breathe through and there are
nocturnal species and we've seen quite a
few just exploring the environment of
foraging so we're gonna let this one go
now millipedes are amongst the most
diverse group of arthropods in the world
being one of the earliest animals to
walk on land as a result of having poor
eyesight they communicate through touch
they navigate their environment by
feeling with their legs and then 10i and
are able to taste their surroundings
with their bodies as decomposes they
feed on Deborah's collected on the
ground
recycling dead waste which becomes new
soil making them vital for the Savannah
ecosystem the open grasslands of Africa
are one of the most diverse ecosystems
on earth they support millions of
species which are all intrinsically
connected but they are also amongst some
of the fastest changing and
unpredictable African environments parts
of large-scale African savannah have
disappeared by 75% in the last 50 years
areas which are vital for the species
which live there one animal has suffered
greatly across the continent due to
extreme habitat loss but in South Africa
their population is increasing the
giraffe one of the most distinctive
species across the continent and also
the tallest mammal to walk our planet
the easiest way to tell the difference
between a male and a female is the horns
on top of their head called the Aussie
cones that a female will have Tufts of
hair on top whereas the males will be
completely bald and that's all due to
fighting known for their remarkable
biology they have evolved some peculiar
adaptations which allow them to graze
without competition
their huge long tongues are pigmented a
kind of dark blue a color which protects
them from the Sun and this enables them
to eat high in the treetops all day long
not only are they able to withstand the
scorching Sun whilst they eat but their
skin is truly extraordinary
it was long wondered why giraffes had
their spectacular patterns but we've
seen their striking patches may help
them stay cool it was found that
underneath each darkened patch they had
sweat glands but the size of these
glands were significantly larger
suggesting that indeed their skin plays
a vital part in them regulating their
body temperature and therefore surviving
giraffes are capable of travelling more
than 10 miles a day as they browse
acacia trees but when the giraffe begins
to feed that acacia tree releases
powerful chemicals to deter its predator
and as it does it sends signals down
through its root Network warning the
surrounding trees but as the giraffe
eats it spreads seeds and can even
pollinate the acacia scours in this
evolutionary arms race every single
living thing is connected as they
evolved as one over
of years and without the giraffe the
open plains would look very different
next time on wild land South Africa we
delve into the sneaky traits that some
species have evolved to help them
survive in their environment and
subscribe to BBC Earth for more
fascinating wildlife videos from around
the world
[Music]
[Applause]